The Project Gutenberg eBook of The highland glen, by Matilda Wrench

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The highland glen
       Plenty and famine

Author: Matilda Wrench

Release Date: May 16, 2023 [eBook #70779]

Language: English

Produced by: Bob Taylor, Fay Dunn and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HIGHLAND GLEN ***





  Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_




THE HIGHLAND GLEN.




THE PROFITS WILL BE GIVEN FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE SUFFERING
HIGHLANDERS.




  THE
  HIGHLAND GLEN;
  OR,
  PLENTY AND FAMINE.

  BY
  MATILDA WRENCH.

  LONDON:
  B. WERTHEIM, ALDINE CHAMBERS,
  PATERNOSTER-ROW.

  M DCCC XLVII.




  MACINTOSH, PRINTER,
  GREAT NEW-STREET LONDON.




THE HIGHLAND GLEN.


Reader, have you ever visited the western Highlands of Argyleshire?
If you have, you will doubtless retain many a pleasant memory of the
wild glens and the fair lakes, and the picturesque and magnificent
mountains that make up the lovely scenery of these regions of the
beautiful. If you have not, trust yourself for a few brief minutes to
our guidance, while we strive to recal the impressions of one day,
out of many happy days, passed in a Highland village there, not very
long ago.

The traveller who visits this spot, seldom leaves it without
exploring the upper shores and the Serpent’s Fall, at the head of
Loch ——, nor did I and my companion; and, as we were slowly rowed
up it against the tide, we gazed in admiration at the pyramidal
and craggy mountains that towered majestically above the deep blue
waters of the lake, shelving into them, and jutting out in little
promontories that almost met on either side, damming up the current
so as to make it discharge itself with tenfold impetuosity as it
escaped from the narrowed channel. One of our guides was a student
of St. Andrew’s, the son of one of the smaller tenantry on the
Lochiel estates, and, during the vacation, he was endeavouring,
by rowing visitors about the lake, to raise a small sum of money
for the purchase of books to enable him to pursue his studies on
his return to college. He was a fine athletic-looking lad, with a
countenance of remarkable intelligence, and was perfectly well versed
in all the legends of the locality. Indeed, his older and more staid
fellow-labourer at the oar now and then allowed a half incredulous
smile to steal over his weather-beaten face, as Mr. —— related how
the shepherd of the glen, in ages past, had, after many warnings,
been changed into a mountain on the Inverness side (where, alas! he
was wont to stray), and how his faithful wife, who had many a time
strained her eyes in vain in watching for his return, was rewarded
for her fidelity and devotion, by finding herself and the stone, on
which she used to sit in the dim twilight, gradually growing into the
shapely mountain that still bears her name,[1] so that, while the
world lasts, she shall never again lose sight of her gude man. It
was truly an idle tale, and yet not, perhaps, altogether vain, for
it might suggest a thought of sin and sorrow, that pair inseparably
united by a decree which none may break. But we must not linger thus,
lest minutes turn to hours, and patience be tired before her time.

After many a vigorous stroke, and many a long pull, that caused the
beads of dew to stand thick upon the brows of our almost-exhausted
boatmen, who with all their efforts could scarcely keep their course
among the eddies of opposing currents, we at length saw the water of
the fall, flowing into the lake, and gazing on it in admiration, like
a silver line upon a field of ultramarine, soon after landed.

I will not stop to tell of sketching and climbing, and of boggy
swamps that threatened to impede our way to the most desirable points
of view. I will only say that we were thoroughly exhausted with
fatigue and hunger, when, after some hours spent in exploring, we
turned our steps towards a “house of refreshment” which our boatmen
had pointed out. They had promised to announce our approach, and
accordingly we found the table spread with freshly-made oat-cake,
still hot and crisp, a large bowl of rich cream, fresh butter, a
bottle of whisky, and a drinking-horn.

The “house of refreshment” was, however, nothing more than a rough
Highland hut, situated at the foot of the old road up the glen, if
road that could be called which was formed of a succession of vast
ledges of rock from three to five feet high; such as it is, it is
the only opening among the mountains that, bare and rugged, rise
abruptly on all sides, and it is bordered by a narrow track, down
which the drovers still conduct their flocks and herds, unless when
it is flooded by the mountain torrents, that rush thundering through
the glen, and discharge themselves through a chasm in the rock to
the left of the hut, forming one of the small streams that feed the
lake. A huge, shapeless mass of rock rises just opposite this rustic
shelter, and must serve to break the violence of the blasts that
sweep the glen, though it also hides the romantic beauties of its
entrance.

A little group of three or four children were clambering over the
rocks, and dragging huge branches of the bracken, which they had been
out to get, as litter for the favourite cow that stood in a byre or
shed at one end of the hut. At the sound of their ringing laughter
as they drew near, a rough, wiry-headed tabby cat, that had been
basking in the sun, put up her back, and after leisurely stretching
herself and pawing, walked to meet the merry ones, and purred and
rubbed herself against each in turn, turning up her green eyes as
if she expected a caress in answer to her greeting. The bracken was
dragged to the cow-shed, and then with a yell of self-gratulation,
or of hunger, we cannot precisely say which, the whole number rushed
into the room we occupied, and as suddenly disappeared through a side
door.

Our meal despatched, and neither waiter nor hostess appearing, we
had leisure to survey the apartment. The centre was supported on
what was literally a roof _tree_, for a venerable beech, that had,
perhaps, been the original attraction to the site, still upheld the
simple framework of the roof, raised aloft on its double-twisted
stem, selected, doubtless, for its promise of double strength. In
one corner of the room stood a solid oaken chest, the receptacle of
the meal that supplied the family with food; opposite was a bed, or
rather shake-down, for it was on the floor, but looked very clean
and comfortable; on the third side the peat was giving out its red
heat from a spacious hearth, and indeed induced such a feeling of
suffocation, that we would fain have opened the window for a little
fresh air from the mountains. The massive framework, however, was
not made to open; it seemed calculated rather to exclude light as
well as air, for the proportion of glass was small indeed; so in
despair I went to the side door, and, in opening it, nearly tumbled
through, for the earth (there was no flooring) had sunk so much at
the threshold as to have left a sort of trench. I recovered myself
and stepped over, and there were the four barefooted urchins with
their curly heads and their rosy cheeks, the very picture of health
and glee, standing round a three-legged stool on which their mother
had set a large bowl of smoking potatoes and milk. They were sipping
and eating, and just as I entered the room, the elder boy having
fished up a particularly attractive, flowery bit of potato between
his finger and thumb, ran to the baby, a fine child of some ten or
eleven months old, who was sitting on its mother’s knee, and began
to cram its tiny mouth with the delicious morsel which broke and
crumbled and fell into the infant’s lap; the petted baby smiled and
laughed, and helped to pick up the crumbs, and put them, not into her
own mouth, but her mother’s. “That’s a braw bairn,” exclaimed the
mother, “a right Highland lassie, aye to gie the bit and sup afore
you tak’ it yoursel;” and the child, at the sound of its mother’s
voice, turned to her, and forgot the potato and nestled in her
bosom, and she bent her head over the bonnie wee thing, and gave it a
long fond kiss, as though it had been her first-born. She was seated
on a low oaken bench, such as in England is called a settle, and a
high screen behind her prevented her seeing our entrance.

We stood for a moment looking on the scene of simple domestic
happiness before us, and then introducing ourselves by a few words
of greeting to the group around the bowl, we thanked the hostess
for our seasonable refreshment, and asked what we should pay. “Oh,
naething, just naething,” was the reply; “ye’re wanderers and far
frae hame, and ye’re welcome.” We remonstrated. She shook her head,
saying, “God has gi’en us plenty, and he bids us use hospitality,
and ye winna gainsay his bidding, so just gang in peace,” she added,
laughing goodhumouredly, “for ye’re far frae ——, I guess, and ye’ll
hae a long pull hame.”

It was indeed getting late, and the thought of four hours on the
lake in the dark, had a hurrying tendency, so pointing to the Bible
and hymn-book on the shelf above the children’s bed, we bade her
remember us in their evening worship, and, slipping some silver into
the children’s hands, we took our leave. We had not gone many yards
before we met a Highlander with a net at his back, and a basket of
fish before him, and the shout of delight which in another moment
burst from the cot, proved him to be, as we had supposed, the father
of the group within. Before we had gone far, we heard a sonorous
voice raising the evening hymn, and anon the sound of shrill and
infant voices mingling with it. We could not stop to listen, but we
joined in heart, and as a fresh breeze from the mountain pass brought
the sweet sounds once more to our ear, we fervently exclaimed (as
again they died away), in the words of their native poet:—

    “May He who stills the raven’s clamorous nest,
      And decks the lily fair in flow’ry pride,
    Yet, in the way his wisdom sees the best,
      For them and for their little ones provide,
    But chiefly in their hearts with _grace divine_ preside.”

Such was the condition of a Highland family in the autumn of 1845.
And now we are about to reverse the picture; to show our Highland
family under other circumstances, and we would entreat the reader to
remember that since the joyous and the grievous, the bright days and
dark days, are alike of God’s appointment, it must be good for us to
look upon both,—to look, to meditate, to minister, and it may be, in
so doing, to learn a lesson that may be to _our_ profit as well as
theirs. May God of his infinite mercy grant it, to the glory of his
holy name, through Jesus Christ!

Eighteen months had passed over the Highland cottage, and in their
brief course had swept away almost all that it had once contained
of the appliances of domestic usefulness and comfort; for the
scarcity which had been felt on the partial failure of the potato
crop in 1845, had, in consequence of the _general_ failure of the
following year, advanced through the successive stages of privation
and destitution, till it might now truly be said in the simple, but
emphatic language of Scripture, that “the famine was sore in the
land,” for “_their food has been destroyed,_ and means of purchasing
other food they have not.”[2]

It is about the second week in January, 1847, that we would again
introduce our friends to the home of the M’Kenzies. An air of
desolation now reigned around it,—all was still. There was no hum
of children’s voices making glad the lonely glen; the fowls that
had gathered round the cottage-door were no longer to be seen, the
pig-stye was empty,[3] the stream was frost-bound.

The thatch which had been secured by birch twigs linked together in
the Highland fashion, and kept down by a great stone suspended from
the twisted ends, and dangling in front, was half off. The elder bush
that had grown beside the shed was gone, and its hollow branches no
longer creaked in the wintry blast, for when labour was scarce, and
peat was three times its usual price, any thing that would serve for
firing was little likely to be spared. The interior of the cottage
offered a sad and striking contrast to the scene of joy and plenty it
had presented before.

The table, formerly so hospitably spread for us, was gone; the
meal-chest, the children’s bed, the comfortable settle, each in
its turn had been parted with for food; the inner door was open,
and there were the bairns, no longer fresh, rosy, full of life and
vigour; they had ceased to attend the school; they had ceased to
climb the overhanging rocks, and splash and dabble, like so many
wild birds, in the stream that foamed beneath the ledge on which the
cottage stood. Poor children! they were all lying huddled together
on a mattress, with a dirty blanket over it: their old pet the grey
cat curled up among the group. They were scarcely covered, for
the one scanty, tattered garment which did not reach the knees,
showed the deep poverty that had fallen on the parents. They were
anxiously waiting for the hour when the little portion of milk
which the wretched half, no, not half-fed cow, still yielded, was to
be divided among them. It was now three days since they had tasted
any other nourishment, and M’Kenzie and his wife began to think it
would be better to sell or kill their cow, than thus to see their
little ones pining away beneath the united pangs of cold and hunger.
But there had been no fire upon the hearth that day; for the few
peats that remained were husbanded to dress the meals that they
were daily hoping might, through some providential channel, come to
them. And the children awoke at night, crying with cold; and one
of them sobbed, and said,—“Collie is always warm. Oh! mither, let
me gang sleep wi’ Collie; for Robin and Moggie are like the frost
to me.” The father spoke not! but he went to the shed and led in
the poor miserable-looking cow, that staggered from weakness as it
stepped over the stones at the door. He brought it to the side of the
children’s bed, and, when it lay down they stretched themselves upon
it, and the gentle creature, that in happier days had been caressed
and often wreathed with garlands of the broom and heather by them,
turned its head and fixed its large mild eye upon them, as though
sensible of their sufferings, and pleased to minister to them, and
for some hours suffering was forgotten in sleep.

The following morning word was brought that there was work to be had
at ——, across the hills, and that, perhaps, M’Kenzie might be able to
get some. He sighed heavily, but he nodded assent, and, bidding his
wife get the Bible from the shelf, and beckoning to the children to
come and stand around him, he read the twenty-third Psalm, and his
voice became firm and clear as he said,—“I shall not want,” for he
said it in David’s spirit, and he believed it in his heart, and the
sense of his failing strength that had clouded his brow, gave place
to the assurance of faith, as he read the promise of the Staff that
is of power to support the weak. And when he had prayed that in the
might of the promise he might go forth, he lifted the hymn as usual;
and it was a hymn of _praise_, so that the passing stranger might
still have thought it went up from light and happy hearts. And so,
indeed, it did; for how “shall the righteous be made sad, whom I have
not made sad? saith the Lord God.”

The morning worship over, M’Kenzie started on his long and toilsome
walk. The embankment, which was the scene of labour, was full ten
miles off, over moor and mountain, but he got there after two hours’
hard walking, and applied for employment. He was received, and at the
end of the day was paid _one shilling_ for his toil; and he went
further ere he turned towards his home, to spend his earnings in meal
for his family. It was late ere he reached his cabin, his little
ones had cried themselves to sleep. His wife, after watching long
for his return, oft turning to her sleeping children in the sickness
of hope deferred, and then again straining her eyes to look through
the casement for her husband, had seated herself at the foot of the
bed with her hands clasped tightly together, the indication of a
strong mental effort to repress the feelings of anxious suspicion
that were busy at her heart, and thus M’Kenzie found her. He shewed
the bag of meal, and told her that he had no doubt of being employed
at the embankment while the works were in progress; but as he
spoke, his words became tremulous, his hand dropped, and he would
have fallen, if his wife had not supported, and half dragged him
to the bed. Reader, you have read in books of fancy and fiction,
scenes of _imaginary_ faintings from _imaginary_ sources of emotion
and of suffering, and, perhaps, you have wept at them; and for such
_imaginary_ distresses, your tears were _enough_, nay, all too much.
They will _not_ suffice here. M’Kenzie had walked ten miles to his
labour. He had honestly put forth all his strength to his appointed
task, he had made a circuit of six miles to get the oatmeal for his
children ere he set out on his homeward path. ALL this he had done,
and _he had not tasted food that day_. His wife succeeded so far in
reviving him, that he raised his head and looked around, but he could
not speak. She looked for a sup of milk in the earthen jar—their only
remaining vessel of any kind,—but it was empty. The poor respited cow
gave what she could—a scanty supply, all thin and watery! and unlike
the rich abundance she had formerly yielded; still it was precious,
and as Margaret saw the colour stealing over her husband’s wan face,
she was thankful that Collie had been spared. If they could but
manage to keep her alive still, but the skin hung in huge wrinkles
over the projecting bones, and except the dry and withered bracken,
fodder there was none for her.

To kindle the few smouldering peats that lay upon the hearth, and to
prepare a mess of porridge for her husband, was Margaret’s next care,
but M’Kenzie protested that he was abundantly refreshed already,
and that he was too sleepy to wait for the cooking of the porridge.
Margaret urged him, but he would not be persuaded, and they closed
the day with prayer and reading, and together joined in praising Him
who had made good his promise of the morning, and supplied their
need,—“I shall not _want_;” and as they lay down on their heather
mattress with their little ones, all sense of want was gone, and
filled with the consciousness of their Heavenly Father’s presence
with them, and of his love towards them, his everlasting love in
Christ Jesus, they slept in peace! Reader, what would _they_ have had
to sustain their fainting spirits if they had been living without God
in the world?

But morning came again, and with it the cries of the little ones
for bread. The elder children tried to hush them, but they had
had nothing except an occasional sip of milk the day before, and
their cries were only to be stopped by food. Margaret soon rose and
prepared the porridge, asking God’s blessing on that which He had
given. They stood round and eat by turns, beginning at the youngest
save one, who was an infant at the mother’s breast. But when it
came to M’Kenzie’s turn, he shook his head, and looked away. “Nae
lassie, nae, I canna eat the children’s bread,” he exclaimed. But
now the wife would not be refused; “And what is your strength but
the children’s bread?” she replied, “ah, man! ye maun eat, or ye
canna work; and neither bit nor sup shall pass _my_ lips till ye hae
eaten what’s there. I’ve mair on the fire for the bairns, and you’re
wanting to be awa’, for its a sair, sair bit, that ye hae to gang
till your work.”

“Dinna ca’ it _sair_, lassie, and I’ll do as ye would hae me, for
oh, its mony and mony a braw Highlander that looking on a family o’
hungry weans would bless God for the like, even if the wage were
less;” and he eat up the porridge as he was bidden (there might be a
matter of a tea-cup full).

Again the blessed book was read aloud; again he led the prayer, that
was prayer indeed, for it arose from a sense of actual want, and it
arose in the assurance that, through the merits of the Redeemer, that
want, the temporal as well as the spiritual, would be supplied. And
the thought of the mercies of yesterday quickened his faith, and gave
animation to his voice as he raised it in the hymn of praise: and
then he “went forth to his labour,” for that was _his_ part, and he
felt strong to do it.

We will not prolong our history by recording the details of days
that came and went in like manner: for about three weeks the father
continued to work at the embankment, returning to his family with
the fruits of his labour every evening. But day by day his strength
declined, and on the fifth of February, it was two hours past
midnight before he returned to his anxious wife. He found her in
earnest prayer, and as he stepped over the threshold, the words,
“Lord, wilt Thou leave us to perish, the mother with the little
ones?” fell on his ear in accents wrung from an agonized spirit. In
the intenseness of her supplication she had not heard even _his_
approach. Her head which had been flung back was suddenly bent
forward, her hands relaxed somewhat of the tightness of their grasp,
and the anguish seemed to have passed away as she fervently and
firmly added,—“Yet not _my_ will, but _Thine_ be done.” It must be so
indeed, for would our gracious God have bidden us “cast our burden
upon him,” unless it had been his purpose to receive it from us?[4]

Her eye now fell upon her husband, and a strange chill crept over
her as she remarked his wild and haggard look. Yes, the plague had
begun! nature overtasked day by day, could hold out no longer; and
though the spirit of the man had sustained his infirmities, his
strength had failed at last. For some days he had been struggling
with low fever, but he felt that he could struggle no more, and
that the hand of death was upon him. He looked round upon his wife
and children, but he remembered who had said,—“Leave thy fatherless
children to Me, and let thy widows trust in Me;” and he felt that in
exchanging the weak ministry of his unnerved arm for the strength of
the “everlasting arms,” there was no room for lamentation.

He tried to read the chapter as usual, but his sight failed, and
he lay back upon the clay floor, and never rose from it again. The
fever rapidly assumed the worst form of typhus, and ere the third day
closed in, Margaret M’Kenzie was a widow indeed, and desolate. We
will not linger over details too painful to be needlessly dwelt upon;
we will not unveil a sorrow too sacred to be exposed and dissected;
but we must observe, that there is one feature in the Highland
character which exercised a painful influence on the poor family
in this their hour of deepest affliction. From the rareness among
them of such visitations, any disorder of a contagious or epidemic
kind is regarded by the Highlanders with such a degree of horror as
leads them to shrink from any offices involving contact with the
sufferers, and thus there was none to help; and oh, who but those who
have known what it is to feel the _loneliness_ of sorrow, can realize
the strong consolation that the M’Kenzies found in the assurance of
the sympathy of Christ, and in the remembrance that of him in his
sufferings, it is written,—“Of the people there was none with me?”

The elder boy had been sent to the nearest place to procure a coffin,
and to promise the cow in payment,—it was their only remaining
possession, except the heather mattress, and _that_ none would take,
from dread of the fever,—and Margaret’s wedding gown, which her
husband had tried to exchange for money or for food; but no one had
either to give for it.

When the carpenter heard the boy’s name, he shrunk back, and bade him
be gone, in a voice in which terror predominated over sympathy.

In due time, however, the coffin was brought to the door, and there
deposited; and of the few clansmen who attended to bear their
kinsman to the grave, not one would enter the dwelling to assist in
moving the remains of him to whom living or dying, under any other
circumstances, they would have refused nothing. Poor Margaret! that
_was_ a trial! but not greater than the promise,—“_As_ thy day, so
shall thy strength be.” It was indeed a dark, dark day; but the
promise _could_ not be hidden, even though it was a darkness to be
_felt_. _How_ it was accomplished, the poor widow knew not. The
first-born had helped, and fallen panting at the threshold, fainting
with exertion and with horror; and when the door was opened, those
without drew back, and bade her, though in tones of solemn pity, lay
her burden in its narrow bed herself; and then they signed to her to
retire. She closed the door behind her, and in a few minutes they
drew round the coffin, closed, and bore it to the boat, and rowed in
silence to the island resting-place of the M’Kenzies, in the middle
of the lake.

There is something peculiarly solemn in standing on an island of
graves. The very dust that the summer breeze wafts over us, may
indeed remind us of our mortality,—suggest a thought that it,
perhaps, was once animated: but the complete isolation of such a spot
as this, fixes the mind to the contemplation, as though thought for
once were fettered, and the subject of her meditations were bound
upon her, like the wave upon that sepulchral shore,—and so it was
felt by all now, and not a word was spoken as they laid M’Kenzie in
his long home.

But we must return to the cabin where the roof-tree had thus fallen
in its prime, and where yet, through faith and hope that is in
Christ Jesus, the widow was enabled, amid the desolation of all
things earthly, still to bear up, and amid her first tears, to thank
God that her husband had departed in peace. The delirium had ceased
about an hour before his death, and he had bade his Margaret remember
that, though while spared to his family they had a right to look to
him for support, yet he had been but the instrument, in God’s hands,
for providing it; and that now he was taken from them, God would be
sure to supply their necessities through some other channel, rather
than be wanting to his promise of being a “husband to the widow, and
a father to the fatherless.” He bade her read him the eighth chapter
of Romans, “that blessed chapter,” he said, “which begins with no
condemnation and ends with no separation.” When she came to the words
“killed all the day long—accounted as sheep for the slaughter,” he
fixed his eyes upon her; and as she read on, “in all these things we
are more than conquerors through him who loved us,” he repeated after
her “more than conquerors through Him,” “_more_ than conquerors.” And
as she read further, “I am persuaded that neither death, nor life,
nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall
be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus,” he bowed his head as if in experimental assent, and his
spirit departed to God who gave it.

Such had been M’Kenzie’s end; and his widow as she thought of his
freed spirit rejoicing before the Throne and with the Lamb, was
comforted, and found peace in the expectation of the time when she
and his little ones should also be summoned to that land where “they
neither hunger nor thirst any more.”

That night she read the latter part of the seventh chapter of the
Revelation with her children; and as she told how their father was
now among this “great multitude,” little Moggie cried, and asked as
she shivered with the cold, why they might not go to him; for “O
mither, though ye hae read that there’s nae heat there, onie mair
than here, yet gin there’s nae hunger, it wadna be sae sair to bear.”

The tears fell fast from Margaret’s eyes, the first tears she had
shed, as she took the child upon her knee, and told her that none
could enter that land, but those whom God was pleased to call there,
and that till he gave the summons we must patiently abide here,
suffering his will, and enduring unto the end whatever he sees fit.
“And oh, Moggie, lass,” she added, “ye ken I bless God ye hae aye
kennit, since ye were auld enoo’ to understand, ‘that our Heavenly
Father so loved the world that he gave his only Son to die for us;’
‘and now shall he not with him also freely give us _all_ things?’ And
as he gives hunger and cold to us now, it’s because they’re best for
us, for he _could_ give food and firing just as easily. And oh, my
dear bairns, doesna’ it soften your pangs to think that your Father
in Heaven sends them?”

Moggie put her arm round her mother’s neck and nodded assent and
tried to smile, but the shivering that had seized her was the
beginning of the fever, and she too drooped and died. Margaret told
her that the summons _had_ now come for her, and she asked her if she
would like to go to the Lord Jesus, the good shepherd who had said,
“Suffer the little children to come to me?” The child could not
speak, but she stretched her arms upward, and ere they fell again at
her side, she knew what it was to be gathered among the lambs of the
heavenly pasture; she knew (oh, may we all one day know too), _what
it is_ to “be with Jesus.”

The little stock of meal that the clansmen had brought with them on
the day of M’Kenzie’s funeral, was now exhausted; the cow had ceased
to yield any milk, and would have been killed for food, but none had
strength to deal the fatal blow. The extremity of destitution had now
come upon the bereaved family. The poor infant sought in vain for the
nourishment that was no longer supplied, and cried and mourned upon
its mother’s knees. The two elder boys were down with the fever, but
they struggled hard with it, _their_ summons was not sounded yet.

And do you ask _how_ Margaret and her children were supported? She
shall answer for herself. “We lived upon the promises of God’s
Word, and when they seemed to tarry, we just read the fourth of
Philippians, and so were enabled to wait, though they tarry, through
Christ that strengtheneth us in the spirit.”

Oh, the blessings of a _Bible_ education; if those who undervalue,
or would substitute something else in its stead, could just contrast
the peace of a Highland family, with the despair of an Irish cabin,
where the Scriptures are unknown, and the way of salvation is hidden
from their eyes; they would surely be content to give the Scriptures,
at all events, to those to whom they can secure no earthly good
beside. And may those who _have_ the Scriptures and have _with_ them
the good things of this life, learn to prize them the more highly,
when they see those who have received them into their hearts and
minds, “thankful and contented amid the horrors of starvation.”[5]

But we digress,—two days had come and gone without food of any kind,
and as she had no breakfast to give them, Margaret had let her
children sleep late in the morning; and when, ere she lay down at
night by their side, she had looked on their pale wan faces, the skin
prematurely shrivelled and wrinkled, the bones projecting in place
of the dimpled roundness of childhood, she felt that their hours
must be numbered, and often instead of sleeping, she rose and put
her ear close to each, that she might be sure they still breathed.
And she shrunk overpowered from the thought of passing another night
thus; and then the weary day that followed—deserted by all, not a
living thing came near the dwelling. Still strong in faith, Margaret
cheered her remaining little ones till evening came, and they asked
her to pray that they might go to their father and Moggie. She asked
if they would leave her then alone? they said she should ask to go
too. And then the second girl Jeanie asked why, if God heard prayer,
he had not heard theirs and given them bread? It is written, “He
giveth not account of any of his matters,” said the mother solemnly.
“It is written, too, ‘He doth not _willingly_ afflict the children
of men,’ and (in pity to the weakness of our faith, and as if to
meet the very cravings of our questioning), it is most graciously
written also, ‘What I do thou knowest not now, but thou _shalt_
know hereafter.’” This was said, as is generally the case with the
Scotch in speaking directly of Scripture, in the pure English of
the authorized version; it was also said, in a tone of rebuke, for
perhaps nothing could have excited her feelings so deeply as the idea
of unbelief of God’s Word, or distrust of God’s love in any of her
children. It was as though the enemy had found entrance; as though
the wolf, seeking whom he might devour, had got into her little fold.
She took the child on her knee, “Jeanie, lass,” she said, “It is nae
sae lang syne that you should forget the day your father corrected
ye and kept you withouten yer parritch for dinner or supper, because
ye’d displeased and disobeyed him; and did ye think _then_ either
that he _could na’_ have bidden me gie ye the parritch; or that
he had nae gude reason for not bidding me. Ye thinkit nae siccan a
thing, Jeanie, and ye maun ken that your Heavenly Father has a right
to chasten ye, as well as your earthly, and ye maun _feel_ as well
as _ken_ that he does it for your profit.” The little girl leant her
head against her mother’s shoulder and wept; and Margaret kissed her,
and continued soothingly,—“I dinna expect ye to find it pleasant,
lass, ‘for no chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, but
grievous.’ And this is grievous above measure, in especial for weans
like ye; but remember we ‘do not live by bread alone, but by every
word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord.’ And pray, pray to
him to forgive you the thought of your heart, and to make you ‘trust
him, though you canna trace him;’ he says, ‘I will never leave thee,
nor forsake thee.’ You saw that he was with your father and Moggie,
yet they died, but He was with them as the life of their spirit, and
now they are with Him for ever.” The child, soothed by her voice and
warmed by her embrace, ere long fell asleep in her arms; and thus
Margaret passed the dreaded night. She would not move for fear of
breaking the deep, sound sleep; but the presence of her God was with
her, and none of the terrors of darkness were suffered to approach
her.

The morning dawn showed Margaret her other children stretched on
their mattress as usual; but the grey cat, their constant companion
had disappeared. Stiff and weary, the mother laid herself down by
them and fell asleep; and the day was far advanced when she again
opened her eyes on the scene of so much suffering. The fever had not
attacked the others; and the boys who had had it, were recovering,
though so weak that without nourishment as they were, it was plain
they could not long survive. The baby seldom unclosed its eyes, it
lay and slumbered either on its mother’s lap, or on a bundle of rags
in a corner of the room. The rest had become too weak to cry, too
faint to talk, and except when the chapter was read, and the prayer
arose, or when Margaret repeated aloud some promise from God’s Word
to support the hearts of her little ones, silence reigned in the
cottage. Exhaustion produced drowsiness, and quieted the pangs of
hunger. The hope of procuring food had almost deserted her; the only
dwelling within two miles, was a solitary cabin, whose tenants were
little likely to be better provided than herself; and Margaret felt
that she had now only to wait in patience, till He who hath the keys
of death, should open the portals of the shadowy valley and lead them
all through it, to the mansions prepared for them above. Her own
strength was wonderful; it could not be natural strength, for that
had been drained by her infant, and by long abstinence and painful
watching; it was the strength of woman’s devotedness, upheld by faith
in the Word of God.

She led the morning worship as usual, and she prayed in calm
resignation that she might be enabled to submit her will with
cheerfulness to the will of God; and she praised the loving Saviour
for his gracious assurance, in his invitation to the little children,
that he would receive them. To Him in death, as she believed, she
now committed them; but the thought, that she had not yet fully done
_her_ part, sunk upon her conscience; and giving the baby into the
charge of the elder ones, she bade them pray that God would guide
her way while she went in search of food to keep them all alive. But
she had overtasked her powers, and as she met the current of fresh,
cold air, her head swam, her steps tottered, and she fell as she
crossed the threshold. And it was a shriek of ecstasy such as she
little thought her famishing bairns could have raised, such as for
many a day, many a week had never fallen on her ears that roused her
again to consciousness. She rose, and supporting herself by the wall,
re-entered the room. And oh, what a sight met her eyes, there was
the grey cat with a large fish in its mouth upon the children’s bed.
He who had formerly fed his prophet by the ravens, had now in this
affecting providence shown his care of them.[6] The fish was brought
as one of the boys suggested, from an old _yare_, or fish trap at
the head of the lake. Hunger had overcome the instinctive dislike of
the cat to water, and the instinct which leads the species to play
with its prey before despatching it, had thus been overruled for the
sustenance of his people, by him “who ordereth _all_ things.”

The cat dropped the fish between the children, and purring and
rubbing herself against them, jumped down, and made her way through
the opened door. She returned with a second supply, and for three
days the family were kept alive in this manner. If Margaret’s faith
had been firm and unwavering before, we need not wonder that now all
care for the future seemed taken from her heart. God had begun to
restore, he would not mock her hopes; and the desire of life and the
thought of better, no not better (for never had she lived so near
her God), but brighter days revived. It was at this time that the
deputation from the Destitution Committee arrived in Argyleshire.
They visited the glen, and awarded to Margaret, in common with about
120 of the most destitute families, an allowance of meal, sufficient
for the support of herself and her family for six weeks.

And now we would, ere we part, say a few last words to the reader.
Have you as you read felt moved by the tale of suffering, such as
perhaps you never even imagined before? Then if you have, let the
feeling _work_; for it has been well said, “When such relations in
real life are listened to, without any efforts for the relief of
the sufferer, the emotion is gradually weakened;” and that moral
condition, “so abhorrent to our fellow creatures, so alien from the
Divine Nature, is produced, which we call selfishness and hardness of
heart.” And we might appeal even to this very selfishness; for that
which is the case of our brethren now, may ere long be our own. We
trust that through the sparing mercy of our God, and his blessing
on our harvests, sought by our humiliation through the merits of
the Redeemer, it may be averted from us. But “_as_” in such a case,
_should_ it ever be your own, “ye would that men should do unto you,
_even so_ do unto them.” “To-day harden not your hearts.”

The Highlander too has a peculiar claim on our bounty, for he has
ever been ready to minister to the wants of the stranger and the
traveller. During a tour of some weeks among the mountains and the
glens, we very frequently closed an evening ramble by a visit to
their cottages. And never in one single instance, though we were a
party of five, were we allowed to depart without partaking of their
hospitality; nor would they receive remuneration in return. Their
hospitality they can no longer offer, their meal chest is empty,
their cow has long been gone, and is it not the time for us to render
back what we so freely received? But they have a _higher_ claim. It
is written,—“Do good unto all men, _specially unto them that are of
the household of faith_,” and such are they.

“And oh, may we all have grace so to deny ourselves that we may be
enabled to follow the example of His compassion, Who, ‘though He was
rich, yet for our sakes became poor.’ And Who, though content for
our sakes to endure himself the pinching pains of hunger and want,
yet suffered not the multitudes to go hungry away.”


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Caillian, the gude wife.

[2] Second Statement of the Destitution Committee.

[3] “In many of the islands the pigs, being left without food, have
literally disappeared, and the fowls, no longer fed at home, have
wandered, and eagles, ravens, and carrion crows have fallen on them
and devoured them.”—Second Report.

[4] “Cast thy burden upon the Lord;” and it may be some man
shall say, How? Roll it on him with the two hands of faith and
prayer.—_Leighton._

[5] From a letter by the wife of a Clergyman in Argyleshire, dated
March 25, 1847.

[6] Letter from Dr. Aldcorn.




BOOKS

PUBLISHED BY B. WERTHEIM,

ALDINE CHAMBERS, PATERNOSTER ROW.


_By the late Right Rev. M. S. ALEXANDER, D.D., Bishop of the United
Church of England and Ireland in Jerusalem._

  FAREWELL SERMON, preached at the Episcopal Jews’ Chapel,
  Bethnal-green. Published by request. Third Edition, price 1_s._

  The GLORY of MOUNT ZION. A Sermon preached at the Hebrew Service in
  the Episcopal Jews’ Chapel. Price 1_s._

  The FLOWER FADETH (Isa. xl. 7); Memoir of SARAH ALEXANDER. 18mo.,
  cloth, Second Edition, 2_s._ 6_d._


_By the Rev. A. M’CAUL, D.D., Rector of St. James’s Church, Dyke’s
Place, and Prebendary of St. Paul’s._

  The OLD PATHS. 10_s._

  A SERMON preached in St. Paul’s Cathedral, Monday, October 19,
  1846, on the occasion of the VISITATION of the Right Honourable and
  Right Reverend the Lord BISHOP of LONDON. Published at the request
  of his Lordship. 1_s._

  The CHRISTIAN SANCTUARY CONTRASTED with the LEVITICAL TEMPLE. A
  Sermon preached before the Right Hon. the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs
  of London and Middlesex, on the Occasion of the Re-opening of the
  Church of St. James, Duke’s-place. 1_s._

  An APOLOGY for the STUDY of HEBREW and RABBINICAL LITERATURE. 1_s._

  PLAIN SERMONS, on Subjects Practical and Prophetic. 12mo., cloth
  lettered, price 6_s._ 6_d._

  The CONVERSION and RESTORATION of the JEWS; Two Sermons preached
  before the University of Dublin. 8vo., Second Edition, _2s._

  ISRAEL AVENGED. BY Don ISAAC OROBIO. Translated and Answered. Parts
  I., II., III., 1_s._ 6_d._ each.

  The ETERNAL SONSHIP of the MESSIAH. A Sermon preached in the
  Cathedral Church of St. Paul, on the Feast of the Annunciation; and
  in the Chapel of Trinity College, Dublin, April 29th, 1838. With
  Notes and an Appendix. 8vo., 2_s._

  The PERSONALITY and WORK of the HOLY SPIRIT, as revealed in the Old
  Testament; a Tract for the House of Israel. 6_d._

  NEW TESTAMENT EVIDENCES, to prove that the Jews are to be Restored
  to the LAND of ISRAEL. Second Edition, 4_d._

  “INQUISITION FOR BLOOD;” or, the Eternal Obligation on States and
  Governments to inflict the PENALTY of DEATH for WILFUL MURDER.
  Respectfully addressed to Her Majesty’s Prime Minister, and to all
  whom it may concern. By A Witness for “Judgment, Mercy, and Faith.”
  Price 6_d._


Second Edition, with New and Original Details,

  The APOSTOLICAL CHRISTIANS, and Catholics of Germany: A Narrative
  of the present Movement in the Roman Catholic Church. Edited by H.
  SMITH, Esq. With a Recommendatory Preface, by the Rev. W. GOODE,
  M.A., F.S.A., Rector of St. Antholin. Fcp., 8vo. cloth, 3_s._ 6_d._

“Is decidedly the best collected narrative which has hitherto
appeared on the subject.”—_Continental Echo._


  JOURNAL of MISSIONARY LABOURS in JERUSALEM. By the Rev. F.C. EWALD.
  Second Edition, Fcp. 8vo., 4_s._ 6_d._

“This work, dedicated to the Chevalier Bunsen, cannot fail to be
read with great interest, and more especially at a time when many
eyes are directed to ‘the holy city,’ when, it is to be hoped, a
growing anxiety is felt for the spiritual welfare of Israel. We have
laid before our readers the commencement of a series of letters from
our excellent friend Mr. Veitch, for a season the fellow-labourer
with Mr. Ewald in the East; and we think that correspondence will
fully bear out the accuracy of Mr. Ewald’s statements, and bear full
testimony to his zeal, devotedness, and energy to the work of his
Divine Master. The mission of Bishop Alexander has, in some quarters,
been viewed with an approach to jealousy; let those who thus view
it read the volume from which the above is extracted.”—_Church of
England Magazine._


  The CHURCH of ST. JAMES; the Primitive Hebrew Christian Church at
  Jerusalem; its History, Character, and Constitution. By the Rev. J.
  B. CARTWRIGHT, A.M., Minister of the Episcopal Jews’ Chapel. 12mo.,
  cloth, price 6_s._

  The TWO SERMONS preached at the EPISCOPAL JEWS’ CHAPEL,
  Palestine-place, Bethnal-green, on Sunday, December 28, 1845, on
  occasion of the Death of the Right Rev. Michael Solomon Alexander,
  D.D., late Bishop of the United Church of England and Ireland at
  Jerusalem. With an Appendix. By the Rev. J. B. CARTWRIGHT, A.M.,
  Minister of the Chapel. Price 2_s._


  The RETURN of JESUS CHRIST to our EARTH, with its attendant
  Events; Five Lectures preached at Trinity Episcopal Chapel,
  Cannon-street-road, during the Season of Advent, A.D. 1813, by the
  Rev. A. B. EVANS, Minister, Price 1_s._


Lately published, foolscap 8vo., stitched.

TRACTS FOR CHURCHMEN.

  No.1. The ENGLISH REFORMATION NEITHER UNNECESSARY NOR SCHISMATICAL.
  By the late Rev. W. NICHOLSON, M.A., Second Edition, price 2_d._

  No. 2. The RIGHT of PRIVATE JUDGMENT INSEPARABLE from PERSONAL
  RESPONSIBILITY. By the Rev. W. WILLIAMS, M.A. Second Edition, price
  2_d._

  No. 3. The SCRIPTURE DOCTRINE of JUSTIFICATION BRIEFLY STATED. By
  the Rev. W. MARSH, D.D. Second Edition, price 1½_d._

  No. 4. A BULL for the DEPOSITION of QUEEN ELIZABETH, issued by Pope
  Pius V., A.D. 1570, with other interesting information respecting
  the event. Price 2_d._

  No. 5. The CHURCH. By the Rev. H. RAIKES, M.A. Second Edition,
  price 3_d._

  No. 6. BAPTISM as TAUGHT in the BIBLE and PRAYER-BOOK. By the Rev.
  E. HOARE, M.A. Second Edition, price 2½_d._

  No. 7. CHURCH GOVERNMENT and NATIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS. By the Rev.
  T. GISBORNE, M.A., Price 1½_d._

  No. 8. CHRISTIAN INTEGRITY. By the Rev. G. RENAUD, M.A. Price 1½_d._

  No. 9. A DEFENCE of LUTHER against the CALUMNY contained in a TRACT
  called “MARTIN LUTHER’S CONFERENCE with the DEVIL.” By the Rev. C.
  S. BIRD, M.A., F.L.S. Price 3_d._

  No. 10. The APOSTOLICAL INSTITUTION of EPISCOPACY DEMONSTRATED. By
  the Rev. W. CHILLINGWORTH, M.A. Price ½_d._

  No. 11. A POPULAR ADDRESS on the CLAIMS of the CHURCH of ENGLAND
  upon the AFFECTION and VENERATION of the PEOPLE. By the Rev. W.
  MARSH, D.D. Price 1_d._

  No. 12. The SCRIPTURE DOCTRINE of ORIGINAL SIN BRIEFLY CONSIDERED.
  By the Rev. F. O. SMITH, B.A. Price 2_d._

  No. 13. TRADITION as a RULE of FAITH shown to have NO AUTHORITY. By
  HERBERT MARSH, D.D., F.R.S., late Lord Bishop of Peterborough, and
  Margaret Professor of Divinity of the University of Cambridge. A
  reprint. 2½_d._


Also, just published, Vol. I, comprising Nos. 1—12, cloth lettered,
2_s._ 6_d._

Succeeding Numbers are in preparation.

“They have our hearty commendation. The principles advocated are
excellent, the doctrines scriptural.”—_Church of England Mag._

“They are admirable in design, and all of them respectable in
execution; and we warmly recommend them to the attention of our
readers, as fitted, by their extensive circulation, to be highly
useful in these critical times.”—_Record._

“A very valuable series of tracts.”—_Christian’s Monthly Mag._


_By the Rev. W. W. CHAMPNEYS, Rector of Whitechapel._

TENDER GRASS for CHRIST’S LAMBS. Price 6_d._, cloth, 1_s._

CONTENTS.—Creation, the first three days—Creation, the last
three days—The Sabbath—Man, God’s Image—The Tempter—The Fall—The
Redeemer—The new Creature—The new Heavens and Earth—Abel and his
Sacrifice—Enoch walking with God—Noah and the Ark—Babel—Abraham,
a Pilgrim—Abraham offering Isaac—God giving his Son—Moses, the
King’s Ambassador—Christ, the King’s Son—Moses choosing the true
riches—Christ, our Passover—Christ, our Manna—The Serpent lifted
up—Christ lifted up—Sin, the transgression of the Law—The Law
is spiritual—Death, the punishment of Sin—God will not clear
the Guilty—Christ, our Surety—Christ fulfilling the Law—Christ
suffering our punishment—Faith working by Love—Love, the proof that
we are born of God—Hope, the Anchor of the Soul—The Veil of the
Temple—The Day of Atonement—Christ the Rock—The Leprosy—Cleansing
the Leprosy—Balaam—Caleb and the Spies—Crossing the River—The Fiery
Furnace—The Word, a Lamp—Bad Companions—Seeking God early—Make the
tree good—Jesus the Saviour—The Law and the Gospel—False Ways—The
Rock and the Water Floods—The Sick Beggar and his Rags.

  PRAYERS for LITTLE CHILDREN. Price 2_d._

  IMAGES. First and Second Series. Price 1_s._ each.

  BRIEF SKETCH of PATRICK KENNEY, Late Scripture Reader. Price 2_d._

  BREAD UPON THE WATERS. Price 3_d._

  HELEN S—. “An example of suffering affliction and patience.” Price
  1_d._


  FANNY, the FLOWER GIRL. By Miss BUNBURY. 6_d._, or cloth, 1_s._

  The BLIND GIRL of the MOOR. By Miss BUNBURY. 4_d._

  The CASTLE and HOVEL. By Miss BUNBURY. 6_d._, or cloth, 1_s._


_The following, Price 2d. each._

  A HAPPY NEW YEAR—THE INDIAN BABES—I AM SO HAPPY—ST. WERNER’S
  CHAPEL—VICTORY TO JESUS CHRIST—THE BROTHER’S SACRIFICE—THE LITTLE
  DUMB BOY—THE INFANT’S PRAYER—IT IS ENOUGH.


Second Edition, 6_d._; or cloth, 1_s._ with Fac-simile Engravings.

  The AUTOBIOGRAPHY of THOMAS PLATTER, a Schoolmaster of the
  Sixteenth Century. Translated from the German, by Mrs. FINN.

CONTENTS.—Thomas becomes a Goatherd—Becomes a Travelling
Scholar—Begins to Study—Becomes a Ropemaker and Hebrew
Professor—Becomes Armour-bearer, and then Schoolmaster—In the War in
Basle—Turns Printer—Becomes Professor again, and Dies.


Just published, in foolscap 8vo., cloth, price 3_s._,

  EMILY BATHURST; or, At Home and Abroad. By the Author of “A Book
  for Young Women,” and “A Book for Wives and Mothers.”

“The individuals to whom this book is addressed form a large and
influential class of the community; its design is twofold,—to
meet some of the objections which are constantly urged against
undertakings in which every female ought to be interested, and to
point out certain defects which are often visible in the social
circle. If it should be instrumental in awakening in but one young
lady a livelier sense of her duties and responsibilities, the writer
will not consider her time and labour uselessly employed.”

  A BOOK for YOUNG WOMEN. By the WIFE OF A CLERGYMAN. Second Edition,
  stiff cover, 6_d._, or cloth lettered, 1_s._

“A book which may most advantageously be placed in the hands of young
women.”—_Church of England Magazine_.

  A BOOK for WIVES and MOTHERS. By the WIFE OF A CLERGYMAN. 6_d._, or
  cloth, 1_s._

_For Parochial Distribution._

  HOW SHALL I COME to the TABLE of the LORD? Ninth Edition, 2_d._

“One of the most useful little books that have appeared for a long
time. The objections that are so frequently made to attending the
Lord’s table are met in a singularly simple and happy manner, and we
can strongly recommend it, either for young or old.”—_The Teacher’s
Visitor_.


_By ELIZABETH MARIA LLOYD._

  WE ARE SEVEN; or, the Little Mourner Comforted. Third Edition,
  6_d._, or cloth lettered, 1_s._

“The Author has made Wordsworth’s beautiful poem the groundwork of a
narrative for communicating Evangelical truth, and it is written in
so pleasing a style, that we think it cannot fail to interest and be
useful to the young.”—_Teachers’ Offering._

  SANCTIFICATION, the BELIEVER’S PRIVILEGE. Second Edition, price
  2_d._

  THIRZA; or, the Attractive Power of the Cross. Translated from the
  German. Eighth Edition, 6_d._, or cloth lettered, 1_s._

  SELIGMANN and NATHAN. Two Authentic Narratives. Translated from
  the German by SOPHIA LLOYD. Second Edition, 18mo., 6_d._, or cloth
  lettered, _1s._

  LIGHT at EVENING TIME. By A SUNDAY SCHOOL TEACHER. Second Edition,
  price 4_d._


_Works by the Rev. MOSES MARGOLIOUTH._

  The JEWS of GREAT BRITAIN; Being a Course of SIX LECTURES,
  delivered in the LIVERPOOL COLLEGIATE INSTITUTION, on the
  Antiquities of the Jews in England. 12mo., price 7_s._ 6_d._

  An EXPOSITION of the FIFTY-THIRD CHAPTER of ISAIAH; Being a Course
  of SIX LECTURES, preached in Glasnevin Church, near Dublin. 8vo.,
  price 7_s._ 6_d._

  The FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES of MODERN JUDAISM INVESTIGATED; Together
  with a Memoir of the Author, and an Introduction; to which are
  appended a List of the SIX HUNDRED and THIRTEEN PRECEPTS, and
  Addresses to Jews and Christians. With a Preface by the Rev. HENRY
  RAIKES, M.A., Chancellor of the Diocese of Chester. 8vo., price
  10_s._

  ISRAEL’S ORDINANCES EXAMINED; A Reply to Charlotte Elizabeth’s
  Letter to the Right Rev. the Bishop of Jerusalem. 8vo., price 2_s._


  The GERMAN SHOEMAKER and his FAMILY; or, the Blessings of Industry.
  By MARGARET FISON. Price 4_d._, in stiff cover.

  GIUSEPPE, the ITALIAN BOY. By the Author of “The German Shoemaker.”
  With Engravings. Price 6_d._, or cloth lettered, 1_s._

  A TRIBUTE to the MEMORY of THOMAS H. P. BECKWITH, a Christ’s
  Hospital Boy. Price 4_d._

  LUCIE, the SWISS COTTAGER. A Tale. By Mrs. McGREGOR, Author of
  “Little Mary,” &c. Price 6_d._, or cloth lettered, 1_s._

  WHAT SHOULD I DO AFTER THE NATIONAL FAST? By the Author of “Shall I
  keep the Fast? and How?” Just published, price 1_d._

  ROUGH RHYMES for FARMERS’ BOYS. By Miss PARROTT. Price 4_d._

“They are excellently adapted to their purpose, and are worthy, in
all essential points, to take their place by the side of Watts’s
‘Moral Songs.’”—_Englishwoman’s Magazine._

“Miss Parrott talks most sensibly and appropriately on humanity to
animals, industry and fidelity in performance of duty, the fear of
God, filial piety, and many other important subjects; and though some
of her ‘Rhymes’ are rather ‘Rough’, they are so well adapted for the
class of persons for whose use they are designed, that we wish them
a place in every agricultural village school library.”—_Church of
England Quarterly Review._

  If the TIMES are BAD, WHAT are YOU DOING to MEND THEM? 1_d._

  GROUNDS for COMMUNION with the CHURCH of ENGLAND.




  Transcriber’s Notes

  pg 32 Changed: begining at the youngest save one
             to: beginning at the youngest save one

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HIGHLAND GLEN ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
